.TH NICX 1 "2026-04-26" "nicx 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
nicx \- personal Linux system toolkit by Nicolas
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nicx
.RI [ command ]
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ args ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nicx
is a personal Linux system toolkit designed for use on minimal or fresh Linux
installations. It provides a unified CLI for system inspection, package
management, git/GitHub setup, GPG key management, and password-store
administration.
.PP
The tool is self-contained, requires no runtime dependencies beyond the C++
standard library, and stores its configuration in
.I ~/.config/nicx/config.toml
following the XDG Base Directory specification.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B system
Inspect the current system. Default subcommand is
.BR info .
.TP
.B pkg
Package management with install tracking. Detects the system package manager
automatically (yay, pacman, dnf, apt, zypper).
.TP
.B git
Git and GitHub CLI setup, authentication, and repository tracking.
.TP
.B gpg
GPG key management: installation check, key generation guidance, listing,
status, export, and import.
.TP
.B pass
password-store setup and management with GPG encryption and optional git
remote synchronisation.
.TP
.B help
Show general help, or help for a specific command when given as an argument.
.TP
.B version
Print the version string and exit.
.
.SH SYSTEM SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B nicx system info
Display a full system overview including:
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
Operating system name, ID, version, kernel, hostname, and init system
.IP \(bu
CPU model, architecture, core count, and thread count
.IP \(bu
Memory total, used, available, and swap usage
.IP \(bu
Boot mode (EFI/BIOS), bootloader detection (GRUB, systemd-boot, rEFInd)
.IP \(bu
Disk partitions with filesystem, usage, and LUKS encryption status
.RE
.
.SH PKG SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B nicx pkg install \fIname\fR [\fIname\fR...]
Install one or more packages via the detected package manager, then save them
to the tracking list in
.IR ~/.config/nicx/packages.toml .
.TP
.B nicx pkg remove \fIname\fR [\fIname\fR...]
Uninstall packages and remove them from the tracking list.
.TP
.B nicx pkg update
Update all system packages (equivalent to
.IR "dnf upgrade" ,
.IR "pacman -Syu" ,
etc.).
.TP
.B nicx pkg search \fIterm\fR
Search available packages in the configured repositories.
.TP
.B nicx pkg list
Display all tracked packages with their package manager and install method.
.TP
.B nicx pkg sync
Install all packages in the tracking list that are not yet present on the
system. Use this on a fresh machine to restore your full environment:
.PP
.RS
.nf
nicx pkg sync
.fi
.RE
.PP
Packages are stored in
.I ~/.config/nicx/packages.toml
and are portable across machines and distributions.
.
.SH GIT SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B nicx git setup
Check that git and gh (GitHub CLI) are installed, verify git identity
(user.name, user.email), confirm gh authentication status, and display the
configured development directory.
.TP
.B nicx git auth
Run
.B gh auth login
interactively, then configure git to use the gh credential helper via
.BR "gh auth setup-git" .
.TP
.B nicx git status
Show git version, identity, GPG commit-signing status, gh authentication,
authenticated username, protocol, tracked repo count, and dev directory.
.TP
.B nicx git add \fIurl\fR [\fIname\fR] [\fIorg\fR]
Track a repository by URL (SSH or HTTPS). The org and name are automatically
parsed from the URL; pass optional
.I name
and
.I org
arguments to override them. The entry is saved to
.IR ~/.config/nicx/repos.toml .
.TP
.B nicx git remove \fIname\fR
Remove a repository from the tracking list. Does not delete the local
directory.
.TP
.B nicx git list
List all tracked repositories with their org, URL, local clone path, and
whether the directory already exists.
.TP
.B nicx git clone \fIname\fR
Clone a tracked repository into
.IR devDir/org/name .
If the local directory already exists, runs
.B git pull
instead.
.TP
.B nicx git clone-all
Clone all tracked repositories not yet present locally. Repositories that
already exist are skipped silently.
.PP
The development directory defaults to
.I ~/Development
and can be overridden in config.toml with
.IR git.dev_dir .
Repository metadata is stored in
.IR ~/.config/nicx/repos.toml .
.
.SH GPG SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B nicx gpg setup
Check that gpg is installed. If no secret key is found, prints step-by-step
instructions for generating one with
.BR "gpg --full-generate-key" .
.TP
.B nicx gpg list
List all available GPG secret keys in long keyid format, including fingerprint
and uid.
.TP
.B nicx gpg status
Show GPG installation status, the git signing key (user.signingkey),
commit.gpgsign setting, the GPG id configured in the pass store, and total
secret key count.
.TP
.B nicx gpg export \fIkey-id\fR
Export the specified public key in ASCII-armored PEM format to stdout. Pipe
to a file or clipboard as needed.
.TP
.B nicx gpg import \fIfile\fR
Import a GPG key from the given file.
.
.SH PASS SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B nicx pass setup
Verify that pass and gpg are installed, resolve the GPG key to use (from
config or from the first available secret key), and initialise the password
store with
.BR "pass init" .
If the store is already initialised the command reports the current gpg-id
and exits cleanly without modifying the store. Also initialises a git
repository inside the store if git is available.
.TP
.B nicx pass status
Show whether pass is installed, the store directory, the configured GPG id,
the git remote URL, the date of the last git commit, and the number of stored
passwords.
.TP
.B nicx pass pull
Pull the latest commits from the git remote configured inside the password
store using
.BR "pass git pull --rebase" .
.TP
.B nicx pass push
Push local commits in the password store to its git remote using
.BR "pass git push" .
.PP
The GPG key used for the store can be set in config.toml as
.IR pass.gpg_key_id .
If unset,
.B nicx
falls back to the first available GPG secret key.
The store directory defaults to
.I ~/.password-store
and can be overridden with
.IR pass.store_dir .
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help information and exit.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Print the version number and exit.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B nicx
reads its configuration from
.I ~/.config/nicx/config.toml
(or
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nicx/config.toml
if the XDG variable is set). The file is created with sensible defaults on
first run and can be edited freely while
.B nicx
is not running.
.PP
.B Example config.toml:
.PP
.RS
.nf
[output]
color = true

[system]
# show_swap = true

[git]
dev_dir = ~/Development
# gh_user = myusername

[pass]
# gpg_key_id = 6BE764C6C37DEB87
# store_dir = ~/.password-store
.fi
.RE
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/nicx/config.toml
Main configuration file (created with defaults on first run).
.TP
.I ~/.config/nicx/packages.toml
Tracked package list. Written by
.BR "nicx pkg install" ,
read by
.BR "nicx pkg sync" .
.TP
.I ~/.config/nicx/repos.toml
Tracked repository list. Written by
.BR "nicx git add" ,
read by
.BR "nicx git clone-all" .
.TP
.I ~/.local/bin/nicx
Default install location when using
.B make install-user
or the install script.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/nicx
System-wide install location when using
.B make install
(requires root).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/man/man1/nicx.1
Man page installed by
.BR "make install-user" .
.
.SH INSTALLATION
Build and install to
.I ~/.local/bin
(no root required):
.PP
.RS
.nf
git clone https://github.com/microservice-tech-nicolas/nicx
cd nicx
make install-user
.fi
.RE
.PP
Build and install system-wide:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo make install
.fi
.RE
.PP
One-line installer (detects dnf, apt, pacman, zypper):
.PP
.RS
.nf
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/microservice-tech-nicolas/nicx/main/scripts/install.sh | sh
.fi
.RE
.PP
After installation, ensure
.I ~/.local/bin
is in your PATH if using the user install.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Show full system information:
.B nicx system info
.TP
Install and track packages:
.B nicx pkg install neovim tmux fzf ripgrep
.TP
Restore packages on a fresh machine:
.B nicx pkg sync
.TP
Set up git and GitHub CLI:
.B nicx git setup
.TP
Track and clone a repository:
.B nicx git add git@github.com:microservice-tech-nicolas/nicx.git
.br
.B nicx git clone nicx
.TP
Clone all tracked repositories:
.B nicx git clone-all
.TP
Check GPG key status:
.B nicx gpg status
.TP
Set up the password store:
.B nicx pass setup
.TP
Sync the password store with its git remote:
.B nicx pass pull
.br
.B nicx pass push
.TP
Get help for a specific command:
.B nicx help git
.
.SH EXTENDING
.B nicx
uses a self-registering command pattern (OCP). Adding a new command requires
only creating a new translation unit with a static
.B core::CommandRegistrar
— no changes to any existing file are needed. See the project source on
GitHub for the developer guide.
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at:
.I https://github.com/microservice-tech-nicolas/nicx/issues
.
.SH AUTHOR
Nicolas
.RI < https://github.com/microservice-tech-nicolas >
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR uname (1),
.BR lsblk (8),
.BR free (1),
.BR df (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR git (1),
.BR gh (1),
.BR gpg (1),
.BR pass (1)
